---
layout: page
title: Expanding our imagination with coding
---

<div class="bloginfo">Jul 20, 2023 - Tech, Humans, Art | 20 min read</div>

I've recently read an interview with Vera Molnár, the world-renowned Hungarian-born digital artist who is widely considered one of the pioneers of generative art. She started experimenting with making visual art using computers in the late 1960s, in Paris, working at a Sorbonne research lab, mastering two programming languages, Fortran and BASIC, both revolutionary at the time.

When Vera Molnár began her experiments in generating images with the help of computers, and started to incorporate software-generated randomness, computer programming was still in its infancy. The BASIC programming language was developed by another Hungarian, the mathematician and computer scientist John George Kemény, just a few years earlier. Fortran, the language that later dominated scientific computing, was just invented by IBM in the late 1950s.

In the interview, Vera Molnár explained how she relied on computer-generated randomness in her artistic process. On the other hand, as she pointed out, incorporating randomness had a history in art way before computers had been invented. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart is one example she mentions; the maestro was believed to have used dice in composing some of his music.

(A musical dice game published in 1792, Musikalisches Würfelspiel, as called in German, might even originate from Mozart, personally. A similar game was attributed to Joseph Haydn, although neither were confirmed. Interestingly, systems of using dice to randomly generate music were really popular in the 18th century, and can be considered early examples of generative art.)

Also long before the birth of computers, in 1913, French artist Marcel Duchamp was playing with similar ideas when working on "3 Standard Stoppages". He created this artwork relying on the random fall of three pieces of threads dropped onto a canvas. It was, as he described, an experiment to “preserve forms obtained through chance.”

Similarly, the American poet and novelist, William S. Burroughs wrote many poems with the technique of cutting up text and randomly rearranging the pieces. His so called "cut-up method" was later used by artists such as David Bowie, Kurt Cobain and Thom Yorke in writing some of their iconic lyrics.

Thom Yorke, for instance, pulled lines at random from a hat when working on the lyrics for Radiohead's "Kid A" album.

David Bowie even had a computer program called Verbasizer, developed by him and his friend, Ty Roberts, that was inputted text from multiple sources including newspapers, hand-written words, and other literary source material, to facilitate the generation of unique and eclectic combination of words and literary images for his music.

According to Bowie: “If you put three or four dissociated ideas together and create awkward relationships with them, the unconscious intelligence that comes from those pairings is really quite startling sometimes, quite provocative.”

## "Artificial Intuition"

In generative art, the artist gives up part of her control over the final output, and relies on an external system or algorithm that often involves some element of randomization.

As Vera Molnár, who experimented with elementary geometrical shapes all her career, said: "The machine will show you billions of possibilities, of which, with your limited imagination, couldn’t have thought of. So it enriches the senses."

Rolling the dice can take a musical piece into unexpected directions. Computers, however, when programmed cleverly, are able to generate remarkably complex random patterns.

For Vera Molnár, the real surprise was that these patterns created by the cold logic of the computer, opened up a new universe to explore as part of her creative process. She used randomness generated by her BASIC and Fortran code as a sort of "artificial intuition", as she called it.

"I think this is what’s paradoxical about the computer" - she explained. - "It actually helps you to bring into the world what you had only imagined, even when you yourself don’t yet know what that is."

She denied that computers dehumanise art: "The opposite is true. Because it’s thanks to all this technology, we can get very close to what we have imagined. That otherwise we might not have found. [...] So (it) actually humanizes your production. Not dehumanizes, but humanizes."

She repeated the same idea in another interview: “This may sound paradoxical, but the machine, which is thought to be cold and inhuman, can help to realise what is most subjective, unattainable, and profound in a human being.”

## Travelling with an infinite map

I was touched by Molnár's words. Maybe because I have been thinking for a while how to describe the feeling I experience when I'm writing computer code for my work. I love programming, but I've struggled to put into words why.

Of course, unlike Molnár, I'm not an artist, and the code I write are mostly designed to address scientific questions, and not to generate patterns of any artistic value. I'm also by no means a professional software developer. I have no formal education in algorithm design or Agile development practices. I'm a self-taught programmer. I'm more instinctive than skilled.

Yet, I write computer code almost every day to solve various problems in my work. These range from short automation scripts to full data analysis pipelines, visualizations, or graphical user interfaces.

Despite the differences, I think everyone who writes code probably shares a common sensation. It's a strange mixture of the feeling of freedom when navigating in a space of infinite possibilities, the beauty of stumbling upon a simple, elegant solution, and the satisfaction derived from seeing the different pieces finally coming together.

Travelling with an infinite map in your hand, it is only your imagination that sets boundaries to what is possible. As it turns out, the best way of learning is by creating. That way you soon realize the horizons you believed were finite actually expand with every step you take.

I would even say my favourite part of my job as a computational biologist is programming. Perhaps the routine of writing computer code every day might turn monotonous for seasoned developers, but thankfully I still get very excited every time I create an empty file and start typing.

## "Imagination Amplifiers"

You can perceive computers in different ways. You may think of them as lifeless, number-crunching machines, only capable of dry, mechanical computations on zeros and ones. Or you can think of them as devices that have the potential of augmenting human creativity.

Alan Kay, the pioneering computer scientist known for his contributions to object oriented programming and the concept of the personal computer, thought of computers as machines that augment human imagination. He often called them "imagination amplifiers".

Kay believed that rather than using computers as tools for executing tasks, we should use them to extend the horizon of our own imagination. His dream was to develop computers into a personal dynamic medium for creativity.

In other words, computers are not meant to be used the way most people use them today. The majority of us use computers for the most banal things such as sending emails, scrolling through social media sites, streaming videos, browsing images, or online shopping. This is a waste of possibilities. We are only passive users of these applications, and often we don't even understand how they work.

A computer can be much more than that. If used right, it can augment your thinking and creative process. It can be your personal space for exploring ideas, experimenting with new concepts, discovering possibilities you never thought would exist, acting as a medium for your creativity and expression. Like Vera Molnár, you may even feel more human in this space.

Coding is about learning to speak the language of the computer that allows you to engage with it fully. It's like being able to talk with the machine as if you two were close pals, clearly expressing what's on your mind.

## Turning thoughts into code

What makes computer programming so much fun? It's not just the fact that the machine can surprise you with random numbers or unexpected patterns. Coding is mostly fun because you are creating something new out of nothing.

You write code to transform your ideas (your plain thoughts) into a functioning system that can, eventually, interact with reality. It's sort of like building a bridge between your mind and the real world.

It's an amazing feeling when an idea originally born in your mind takes the shape of an executable computer code.

The more complex the code is, the more challenging it may be to put it into an optimal shape (whatever "optimal" means in this context), but the greater the satisfaction one feels. One reason why people love coding is the sense of accomplishment it gives.

"Programming can give us both intellectual and emotional satisfaction, because it is a real achievement to master complexity and to establish a system of consistent rules." - wrote Andrei Ershov, Soviet computer scientist, pioneer in systems programming and programming language research.

The process of turning our thoughts into code is rarely straightforward; it may involve a lot of experimentation, trial and error, iterations, testing, and refactoring. Several computer scientists including Paul Graham, co-founder of Y Combinator, emphasized that the bumpy road of writing a computer program is similar to the process artists follow when crafting their artworks.

Andrew Hunt, co-author of the book "The Pragmatic Programmer", a classic in the software development field, said: "In some ways, programming is like painting. You start with a blank canvas and certain basic raw materials. You use a combination of science, art, and craft to determine what to do with them."

## Code can be beautiful

'Hold on a sec!' you might interrupt me at this point. 'The ultimate raw material of art is beauty. By contrast, there's nothing beautiful about computer coding, right?'

Wrong.

A perfectly crafted computer source code, the way it's structured, its simplicity, modularity, readability, or elegant solutions, can be aesthetically pleasing for programmers the same way mathematicians can find theorems and proofs beautiful.

Some even think the beauty of programming is one of its main appeals. Donald Knuth, who published a seven-volume book series of computer science with the title "The Art of Computer Programming", said in 1968: "The process of preparing programs for a digital computer is especially attractive, not only because it can be economically and scientifically rewarding, but also because it can be an aesthetic experience much like composing poetry or music."

"Think of a treehouse." - said Linus Torvalds, creator of the Linux operating system - "You can build a treehouse that is functional and has a trapdoor and is stable. But everybody knows the difference between a treehouse that is simply solidly built and one that is beautiful, that takes creative advantage of the tree. It’s a matter of combining art and engineering. This is one of the reasons programming can be so captivating and rewarding. The functionality often is second to being interesting, being pretty, or being shocking."

Of course, beautiful code is typically better code. It's simpler to maintain, extend, debug, and reuse. Simplicity, conciseness and readability are more pleasing for the eyes, but are also indicators of efficiency.

Everyone likes clean, well-organized, and self-explanatory code. No one likes spaghetti code. However, implementing a complex solution in simple, readable code – marrying complexity with simplicity – can be hard.

## A way of self-expression

Ultimately, if a computer is a creative medium, writing code is a way of self-expression. No matter whether you are a beginner or a pro, your individuality shows in your code in one way or another. First of all, it's your own thoughts and ideas you translate into code, secondly, coders all have inherently different, often recognizable styles.

Linus Torvalds said: "One of the reasons people have become so enamored with computers is that they enable you to experience new worlds you can create, and to learn what’s possible. [...] Within the confines of the computer, you’re the creator. You get to ultimately control everything that happens. If you’re good enough, you can be God. On a small scale. [...] What makes programming so engaging is that, while you can make the computer do what you want, you have to figure out how."

Indeed, there are often millions of ways to do the same thing. Consequently, you are making a lot of choices along the way. What's very important here is that everyone makes different choices. Your code is infused with your own experiences, knowledge, perceptions, and unique problem-solving approach. From high-level design decisions to the nitty-gritty of implementation details, you bring your individuality into it. The way a function is written, the naming conventions chosen, or even the architecture of a system can reflect the unique mindset and aesthetics of its creator. You are in your code.

I am in my code. Maybe that's why I enjoy programming so much. In some strange, abstract way, it's a mirror. As Steve Jobs has put it in one of his interviews, it is "a mirror of your thought process".

## A creativity explosion

Of course, for artists who code, the purpose of self-expression is more evident. Several specialized programming languages exist allowing them to express themselves through code in various different domains. Today, Vera Molnár wouldn't have to rely on languages as generic as BASIC and Fortran. She would be able choose from various programming languages, libraries, packages, and frameworks created specifically for artists.

There is, for instance, TouchDesigner, a visual programming language for real-time interactive multimedia content, or Max/MSP, another visual programming language for music and multimedia. There are Cinder, p5.js and openFrameworks, open-source toolkits for creative coding, RunwayML, a suite of intuitive creative tools powered by machine learning, or SuperCollider, a platform for audio synthesis and algorithmic composition, used by artists working with sound.

Creative coding is an umbrella term for various ways of using programming and technology for artistic and expressive purposes, such as generative art, digital animation and simulation, algorithmically manipulated music, virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR), physical art pieces that integrate sensors and microcontrollers (for instance, interactive motion-sensing sculptures), live coding, and many other innovative forms of self-expression.

In live coding performances, artists write and modify code on the stage live, producing music and visual art in real-time. At algorave parties, for example, people come together to dance to music generated by algorithms, often accompanied by live coding sessions.

The name "creative coding" is of course somewhat misleading since all coding is, by definition, creative. Even when the output is not expressive or entertaining, coding the system requires creative thinking. A lot of creativity go into the development of the software that controls a nuclear power plant, or a public restroom maintenance system that notifies the cleaning staff when stalls are used a certain number of times or when the toilet paper is running out.

## Programming for five-year-olds

Alan Kay had a vision. He imagined a future where personal computers are not primarily used for sending emails or scrolling images, but as true extensions of our minds, creative spaces for testing and discovering new ideas.

At the core of Kay's vision was that children could also benefit from using computers at a very early age, as these devices would facilitate their development through creative learning.

In the late 60s / early 70s, Kay designed Dynabook, "a personal computer for children of all ages", a portable (notebook-sized) device with a graphical user interface. He hoped it would become a dynamic medium for creative thought that kids would use inside and outside of schools.

He envisioned that children would also be able to learn programming on the Dynabook using, for example, Smalltalk, an object oriented programming language he and his colleagues at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center developed specifically for this purpose.

As he explained: "[...] careful use and design of interactive computing could make a qualitative difference in the higher-level shaping of children’s thinking - not just learning important things earlier, but in taking on a much more powerful “epistemological stance” towards the world they were growing up in - to the point where they should be able to think much better than most adults do today (not a big feat, but desperately needed), and be stronger shapers of the future (really desperately needed)."

The Dynabook never became a reality due to the technological limitations of the time. Its concepts, however, influenced the development of personal computers, especially the design of laptops and tablets. Kay's ideas also inspired initiatives such as the "One Laptop Per Child" project, which aimed to develop and distribute a low-cost laptop known as the "Children's Machine" to kids around the world.

In some sense, children are more intuitive and innovative users of such tools than adults, due to their natural curiosity, imagination and creativity, as well as their extraordinary ability to mix concepts, and come up with original ideas. What's more, just as children's brains are incredibly good at absorbing spoken languages, they are likely very efficient in picking up programming languages easily.

This is also confirmed by research. Studies at the MIT Media Lab showed that children at the age of 5 can already be introduced the basic concepts of programming, and by the age of 7, many can start coding.

Scratch, for instance, a visual programming language developed by the Lifelong Kindergarten Group, a research group at the MIT Media Lab, is recommended for ages 8 and up. It enables children to build complex programs by dragging and dropping graphical blocks that represent code structures. Incredibly, with these tools, kids quickly become proficient with core programming ideas such as loops, variables, conditional statements, and event handling.

ScratchJr, a simplified version of Scratch, was designed to introduce programming concepts specifically to children aged 5-7, and was applied with much success.

The same way kids are taught how to read and write, it is increasingly important to provide them with "coding literacy", as programming is becoming an essential skill in today's world.

Most importantly, the fact that children can start learning to code at a remarkably early age is evidence that programming aligns with fundamental human thought processes and creativity.

## The essence of programming

Who should learn programming? Steve Jobs had a [simple answer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BRTOlPdyPYU): everyone.

As mentioned earlier, although I use programming for my job as a scientist, I am not a formally trained programmer. I guess the point I want to illustrate with my example is that not everyone who codes is a professional developer.

My own coding journey took me from the Turbo Pascal programming language (at the age of 12) through C and C# (my early 20s), Java and MATLAB (my mid-20s) to Python, R and JavaScript, the programming languages I mostly use today for my work.

There are hundreds (or even thousands) of programming languages in the world.

Of course, not only computers can be programmed. If you program a more specialized device than a general-purpose computer, you might not need a general-purpose programming language. There are many domain-specific programming languages designed specifically for instructing certain types of machines. Examples include the KUKA Robot Language (KRL), which controls KUKA industrial robots, and the Zebra Programming Language (ZPL), used for programming label printers to create custom barcodes, QR codes, and other print designs.

So what is programming then? The concept can be very broad, and we don't necessarily have to mention "computers" in the definition.

All it requires is someone (the "Programmer") who is able to record a sequence of actionable steps (the "code"), and an agent (the "Executor") who understands and executes the list of instructions.

Many things can fit into this general equation. In some sense, cooking a dinner based on a Potato & Leek Soup recipe from your favourite Julia Child cookbook can also be regarded as executing a program - with you as the Executor, the Potato & Leek Soup recipe as the code, and Julia Child as the Programmer.

(If you find this cooking example far-fetched, check out the idea of human programming, defined as "the practice of writing sequences of instructions for humans" in this [article](https://humanprogramming.substack.com/p/the-untapped-potential-of-human-programming). The idea of writing "human programs" in a similar way software are coded for computers has numerous real-life applications from emergency evacuation procedures, and assembly line instructions, to educational curriculums, how-to guides and team-building exercises.)

To put it simply, programming is about creating a sequence of operations to achieve a specific goal. While the media vary, the core principles are the same: you have a system with known capabilities, and you provide it with instructions designed to produce a desired outcome. In essence, it is about bridging the gap between intention and execution. As such, it has a universal importance in our lives.

## A very human medium

Computer programming is often considered a technical subject, and it indeed is, but as discussed above, there is something inherently human about it. It's a journey of exploration and expression. One must delve deep into it to truly understand the amplifying effect coding can have on our creativity and imagination.

People, as we have seen, write code for a variety of different reasons, but the shared love for problem solving connects them.

For me, programming gives a feeling of accomplishment, and I find it extremely stimulating, in many ways. I love breaking down complex problems into simpler ones, building systems from the bottom up, and seeing how things are taking shape. Just like many coders, I often find a flow experience in programming.

The way we write code today has been changing recently with the arrival of Artificial Intelligence powered tools such as ChatGPT, OpenAI Codex, and GitHub Copilot. These new technologies can multiply one's productivity. AI coding assistants understand human language. One can now describe their requirements as they would explain them to another person, and the AI may generate the relevant code in a split of a second.

OpenAI's Andrej Karpathy, former Senior Director of AI at Tesla, phrased it perfectly on Twitter: "The hottest new programming language is English."

In my experience so far, using AI assistance in programming is not only not making it less enjoyable, but it actually makes the process even more exciting.

Vera Molnár said: "‘I think that there is nothing more human than a computer because it was invented by men. It wasn’t the good Lord who plopped it down in front of us, it was made by an intelligent man. Thus, the most human art is made by computer, because every last bit of it is a human invention’."

I must admit, I feel really alive when I sit down to the computer, click on creating a new file, and begin to stare at the empty screen, a blank canvas, and the blinking cursor. There's certainly an adrenaline rush in knowing it is only up to me what happens next.

<br>
[Back to Blog](/blog)
<br>
[Back to Home](/index)
